---
layout: post
title: "How I prepared for DS job interviews"
mathjax: true
---

Today I want to share my experience preparing for Data Scientist interviews in the United States in 2021. At the time I was in the Netherlands working as a Data Scientist Insights (i.e. focused on informing decisions rather than building production models), and I focused my search on similar roles. Despite the challenges of travel restrictions and fewer companies interested in sponsoring visas during the pandemic, I ended up with 3 offers and I'm happy to say I will be starting a new role in October! 

It was a very lengthy process, including a lot of time spent reviewing concepts and practicing programming languages for tests. However, I learnt a lot, and hope this guide will be useful, at least for myself in the future. I'll break this up into two parts. First I'll discuss my approach, then I'll go into more detail on how I studied and prepared for interviews.

## Approach

This was by far the longest process I've been through to start a new job, likely at least in part due to the pandemic. I took the advice of others to apply for multiple positions and companies at once to improve my odds, and gain some bargaining power for salary negotiations. To give you some idea of the timeline, I started spending around 5 hours a week studying in November 2020, started applying for positions in December 2020, finally got some call backs and started interviewing in April 2021, got my first offer in May and another 2 in June before accepting a position in late June 2021. Due to border closures I'm planning to actually start in October 2021, bringing the whole process to around 1 year long. 

In the past I always applied for a single role/company that I was really interested in, and luckily always got the job. In hindsight applying to many places at once was a lot of work, especially if you pass the interviews for multiple companies at once. Next time I would limit it to 3 companies at a time to keep it more manageable. However, I do think it was useful to see how different companies approach data science, and how they interview candidates. It was a valuable learning experience and I think it made me a better interviewer as well. 

## Application to Offer Rate

Out of 36 applications, I ended up hearing back from 7 companies, did around 20 interviews, and got 3 offers (Shopify, Spotify, and Facebook). I dropped out of the process at the onsite stage with Deliveroo and a startup to focus on the above three. Months after I applied I also heard back from Uber and Google, but I already had offers at that point so didn't proceed. 

Others such as Twitter, Apple, LinkedIn, Netflix, and Amazon never responded. Though none gave a reason, I appreciated that companies like Etsy, Grammarly, and Square at least emailed a generic rejection so I knew they weren't interested. 

For all but Facebook I just applied through the company website or LinkedIn. For Facebook a friend refered me, but their recruiters had also reached out in the past. I also had a referall for Spotify, but was already past the recruiter screening. Personally from this experience I think referalls help, but are not essential if you're a good fit for the role. In saying that, maybe I would have heard back from Google and Uber quicker if I had a referal...

## Preparing for interviews

For context, I have around a decade of experience in analytics and have been a Data Scientist for around 6 years. So my prep was mostly focused on reviewing concepts rather than learning something new. Despite this, it still took me a few months (while working full time as well) to feel confident and ready for interviews. Before I go into specific topics, let's discuss what I was preparing for. Though each company/role has a different process, I encountered five main types of interviews: 

- **Describe a past project:** This came up in the recruiter and technical screening, as well as the onsite. I would roughly follow the STAR method (situation, task, action, result) for my response and practice it beforehand. I found they didn't really mind whether the project was successful or not, as long as it's clear why. However, for senior positions, the recruiter usually advised to discuss a project where you initiated it, and were the one primarily responsible. During the interview, expect some follow up questions about the methods you mention (e.g. how did you decide on method x and why, or explain a technical detail about it), and some non-technical questions (e.g. how you managed stakeholders, what were the challenges, or what would you do differently next time).
- **Case Study:** During this interview your given a vague business problem and asked how you would approach it. You can find a lot of examples on sites like Glassdoor for specific companies but it might be something along the lines of: how would you measure the success of product x, or how would you identify 'bad' sellers on a site. In my experience they usually want you to lead the conversation, and clearly and concisely work through your approach to the problem (e.g. define a goal, explain the technical methodology, explain how you would validate it remembering to mention any edge cases or issues, and then talk about how you would implement it or have an impact). The questions will depend on your responses, but the interviewers might also try to help guide you if you're getting off track. 
- **Technical skill assessment:** Similar to the case study, but usually a bit more specific so the time can be spent focusing on the technical details. For example, you might get a question like how would you design a ranking algorithm for product x? What approaches would you use, how would you validate it? What would you prioritise next? 
- **Coding test:** I only encountered SQL and Python interviews, though some allow you to pick a language (e.g. Python or R). The difficulty varied a lot, from doing some simple data manipulation (e.g. grouping, sorting, extracting some value through aggregation), to medium level leet code style questions. The expectations also varied with some being ok with minor syntax errors and they didn't actually run the code, while others required you to execute the code and return the correct results. I was never asked to give the time/space complexity, but some did ask me what I would do to make my solution more optimal. Almost all also worked in some non-coding questions, e.g. what could you do with this data, or how would you interpret the results in the output? So make sure you don't get to deep in the coding and can still take a step back and think about what problems you're working on.
- **Fit or one-on-one interviews:** One on one with a team member / manager (when the role is for a specific team): This could be a fit or technical interview, or a combination of both. I found these were in general more casual, and more about seeing if you would work well with the team and not that deep. Some were a series of questions (e.g. tell me about a time your stakeholder wasn't happy with your work? How did you handle it?), whereas others were more conversational and a mix of discussion about my past projects and what they were working on.



### Technical prep


### Non-technical prep


These included: experimentation, modelling, probability, causality, general maths and statistics, and coding (SQL and Python). More on this later.




- 
- Designing and analysing experiments: Understand the practical and theoretical aspects. For companies like Deliveroo and Facebook that might have network effects, make sure you review the approaches and can discuss the pros and cons.
- Hypothesis testing more generally and descriptive statistics for observational analysis.
- Probability: not every company tested this directly, but at a minimum review the basics.
- Modelling: Clustering, time series models, ranking, 
- Causality: A bit of a hot topic recently, and came up a lot.
- 

# Other prep

**Coding**: Almost every company tested on SQL, some a specific type, but most let me pick. A few companies also had Python coding tests (e.g. solve some easy/moderate level Leetcode style questions, or implement some functions based on a description and the formula). Sometimes they also worked in some practical questions about the data or problem as well, so don't forget to think about the problem at a high level as well.
***Tools I used: [Strata Scratch](https://www.stratascratch.com/), [Leetcode](https://leetcode.com/), [Real Python](https://realpython.com/learning-paths/python3-introduction/)***

**Maths**: Personally I forget some of the basics and tricks that can be super useful in the coding tests. For example, if you're asked to build some functions without packages, it's useful to know that x^1/2 is the same as the square root of x. Distributions also frequently come up, so review the main ones: normal, poisson, exponential.
***Tools: Khan Academy, Brilliant***

**Past work:** Prepare a few examples of your past work. Every company asked at least once for me to walk them through a past project. For senior positions make sure you can give examples where you were owning the project, and preferably came up with the idea (wasn't just assigned to you).

**Product/Project Management:** A common interview type I came across was the 'business problem' or 'case study', during which they give you a vague business problem and ask you how you would tackle it. You need to quickly clarify the question and scope it, and then explain beginning to end how you would approach it. Once you've clarified any points you need to understand the question, a good place to start is usually at the end with what is your goal. Then work through the stages e.g. what data you're going to need, what techniques you will use and why, and how you would communicate that back to the business. For these interviews it helps to look at Product Manager questions/guides as they're similar (just without the technical depth).
***Tools: InterviewQuery, PM questions, StellarPeers, Cracking the PM interview***

